---
layout: post
title: "Ruby Gems"
date: 2014-07-16 18:33:37 -0600
comments: true
categories: Ruby Anatomy
---

A ruby gem is a packaged Ruby library or application that is created by individuals to solve a specific problem or add specific functionality. They are used when building Ruby applications to avoid duplication and prevent reinventing the wheel. Each gem has 3 key parts: name, version, and platform.

The __gem name__ is completely arbitrary, but generally has some correlation to the problem it is trying to solve. Every published gem *must* have a unique name.

The __gem version__, much like Ruby's own version, follows semantic versioning. This consists of 3 numbers, separated by periods, reading right to left in order of importance. Version numbers are similar to a car milage counter; when a number on the right changes, everything to the left is zeroed out and the count begins again.


  + _MAJOR_ - Leftmost position. Increments only when backwards incompatible API changes occur. Updating after such a change will most likely break your code and apps should be fully tested before deployment.

  + _MINOR_ - Center position. Increments any time new functionality/features are added. All changes in this category are backwards compatible to the last major release.

  + _PATCH_ - Rightmost position. Increments for implementation level detail changes and bug fixes.


__gem platforms__ are based on CPU architecture and OS type. The platform simply indicates that the gem will only work on a matching OS type (OSX, Windows, Ubuntu, etc). RubyGems automatically checks your platform and downloads the correct version for you.


Installing a gem
-------------------
There are two ways to install a gem on your computer.
    bundle install gem_name
A program called bundler will fetch the latest gem version for your platform from the rubygems.org API. These gems are installed generally around the user root of your computer, depending on your OS and ruby version. This location works for either installation method, and can be accessed using

    gem list                              (all local gems)

    gem list sinatra -d                   (author/details of specific gem)

Bundler will not only install the gem that you requested, but it will also install any dependencies needed for it to run. This dependency list is packaged  within each gem itself and is automagically handled for you by bundler. To quote the [bundeler.io](bundler.io) home page

> "Bundler is an exit from dependency hell"

For the purposes of this post, just know that there is way more going on with bundler than can be seen by the naked eye. It makes developer life easy by ensuring that the gems you need are present at varying levels of development, testing, and deployment.

When writing programs and developing applications, the preferred method of installing gems on your machine is to use a Gemfile. Running

    bundle install

from the root of your program will install all required gems by putting them "on the load path", making them available to Ruby to run your program. This is a cleaner way of keeping track of what gems are running in each individual program, prevents buggy behavior by enforcing your program to use a specific gem version, and most importantly allows anyone pulling down your code to get up and running with the correct gem set quickly.

Creating a Gemfile
--------------------
A Gemfile is simply a plain text file that holds all of the gem dependencies needed for your application to run Ruby. Gemfiles require at least one gem source, in the form of the URL for a Rubygems server. Upon creation of your project, running

    bundle init

will generate a new Gemfile at the root of your project directory and add the default 'https' protocol source for rubygems.org  automatically. This verifies your connection to the [rubygems.org](rubygems.org) server will be verified with SSL. You can then add/remove gems from this file over time as needed.

All gems should be declared, including version numbers. Without going into too much detail about 'optimistic' vs. 'pessimistic' version constraint and the myriad of specifiers that come with them, just know that omitting this number following your gem name will cause Bad Things to happen. And thus in turn, may cause you to Bang Your Head and loose sleep. I love sleep. Sleep is delightful.

RubyGems provides a 'happy medium' shortcut for version constraint called the [twiddle-wakka](http://guides.rubygems.org/patterns/). This convention drops the PATCH level part of the version number, and will allow any MINOR changes (standards dictate that they must be backwards compatible) up to but not including the next MAJOR release.

    gem 'library', '~> 2.2'

Take away: guard yourself from potential bugs/failures/sleeploss by using the  twiddle-wakka shortcut instead of not declaring a version at all. For Alfred powerpack users, I highly recommend [this extension](https://github.com/BlueVajra/ruby_gem_workflow) for ease of daily life.

Gemfile Groups
----------------
For large programs or applications that require a large Gemfile (such as Sinatra or Rails) your gem declarations can be further organized into groups to limit what gets loaded where. The most commonly used types are development, testing, staging, and production. They can be declared in two ways. A `do end` block for multiple gems within a group:

    group :test do
      gem 'rspec', '~> 3.0.0'
      gem 'capybara', '~> 2.4.1'
    end

or in the same line as your declaration for smaller subsets or standalone gems:

    gem 'rspec', '~> 3.0.0', :group => :test

    gem 'cucumber', '~> 1.3.15', :group => [:cucumber, :test]

Any gems that are not included inside groups are considered default, and will be automatically loaded everywhere. Grouping allows you to pass flags when running `bundle install` to omit unnecessary gems (see: databases) from being loaded onto your computer.

    bundle install --without staging production

Gemfile.lock
-----------
The file that is automagically generated when you run bundle install. Looks virtually identical to your Gemfile, but is only used by your computer. Think of this file as a "last known good" snapshot of the Gemfile. This file is only read by the computer (ie: don't touch), and rarely differs from the Gemfile itself. It's more of a safetly precaution in situations like running `bundle update` but that is another topic entirely that I will save for another day.  









------------

_RESOURCES_:  
[bundler](http://bundler.io/v1.6/bundle_install.html)  
[rubygems.org](http://rubygems.org)  
[guides.rubygems.org/patterns](http://guides.rubygems.org/patterns/)  
[guides.rubygems.org/what-is-a-gem](http://guides.rubygems.org/what-is-a-gem/)  
[gem-sawyer-modern-day-ruby-warrior](http://rubylearning.com/blog/2010/10/06/gem-sawyer-modern-day-ruby-warrior/)  
